[AUDIO LOGO]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We've entered
into an age where everyone's
questioning everything.
And one of the first things most
of the people have questioned
is their religion.
>>PAUL WALLIS: We're all in this
cosmic household, where we're
living in fear and terror.
They've deleted this
worldview where we all
have higher cognitive
powers, and they've
replaced it with this
feudalizing structure.
>>SEAN O'LAORIE:
But most of us are
living cosmologies that
have been imprinted on us
on wet cement up to age 7.
And so, we behave
in ways that we've
been programmed to behave.
Every single one of us should
be responsible for developing
a personal cosmology.
But instead of that, there's
the fundamentalist mindset.
Shut them down.
Don't let them think.
Here's the truth.
You're going to go
to hell if you don't
accept my version of truth.
>>WALLIS: These amazing
transformational experiences
do not belong to any
particular religious
or spiritual tradition.
They are part of the human
experience of the universe.
>>REGINA: That's why I
wanted this conversation.
This is huge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I have so been looking
forward to this conversation.
We're doing something
really special today
and bringing authors Father Sean
O'Laorie and former Archdeacon
Paul Wallace to talk
about the identity
of the actual characters
found in the Old Testament.
Why does this matter?
Because humanity has been
deeply programmed, to this day,
by the words of
our ancient texts--
guilt, shame subservience.
All of it can be
traced back ancestrally
to our religious roots.
So welcome, welcome
from Australia
in the wee hours of
the morning, Paul.
It's good to see you.
>>WALLIS: Good day, Regina.
>>REGINA: And welcome
again in the studio, Sean.
And you two have met a
little bit on the side
and read each other's work.
And so, we all have a
familiar conversation,
creating what you
call a trilogy.
>>O'LAORIE: A trialogue.
>>REGINA: Trialogue.
I love it.
So I have to say to both
of you, what really kicked
me off initially was, in
having interviewed both of you,
the stories that were coming
up were really coming more
from your African connections
and your days in Africa
and African relatives.
And it was a story that didn't
carry this horrid weight
that we seem to have in
the modern Western world,
in the Abrahamic traditions,
of this guilt and shame.
It was a different
story about gods,
so we started digging
a little deeper.
And that's what's
led us here today.
So to start, I would
like to ask each of you--
Paul, why don't you go first--
as to why it matters
that we open up
this can of worms
completely now today.
>>WALLIS: Well, my background
was in church-based ministry.
And part of what I did
there was teach people
to interpret ancient texts.
It's called hermeneutics,
and in particular, the Bible.
And the tools that
we developed in that,
which are source
analysis, where you ask,
where does this text come from?
How is it different
from the original?
And form analysis-- what
kind of literature is this.
And then along with,
what do the words mean?
They were the tools
that I use to study
the books of
scripture, the tools
that every preacher
and scholar uses.
But I found when I applied them
to anomalies in the stories we
tell from the Bible,
they were leading me
in an unfamiliar direction, and
they opened up this whole story
of paleo contact.
Hidden in plain
sight in the Bible
is this story of
ancient ET contact.
And it was from that my
first book on the subject
emerged, "Escaping from Eden."
And I was preparing to publish
that, weighing up in my mind
what this was going to mean for
me to put out something that
was really quite controversial
from a faith background,
that I suddenly remembered I
had to tell my parents-in-law
about this book.
And they are traditional
Christian believers.
They are of Pentecostal
and Baptist background.
And I thought, how do I
break the news to them
that I think a lot of the
Bible is about ET contact?
Because I really do want
to stay their son-in-law.
So I just had to wait until
they'd come and visited
for the weekend, and
everyone was relaxed.
And we had some lovely Ghanaian
food and some lovely wine.
Once everyone was
relaxed, I gently
told them what my
new book was about.
And they sat there, poker faces.
I had no idea how this
information was going down.
And when I finally paused for
breath, my father-in-law, Kofi,
leant back in his chair,
and he said, Paul,
a penny has dropped.
Meaning, that all
those anomalies
in the stories we
tell from the Bible
were beginning to resolve,
and click into place,
and make sense to him.
And then my
mother-in-law, Patience,
leant forward and said, Paul,
we already know this story.
Because in Ghana, you're
taught the Christian Orthodox
view in church.
You're taught the modern
scientific view in school.
But the local knowledge,
the local folklore, we
have always known that there
has been a non-human element
to human history, a non-human
presence on planet Earth
intersecting with
the human story,
and we're very connected
with another family who've
had direct experience of this.
And so, that blew my mind.
I had no idea I was that close
to the experience of the things
I'd been writing about.
And it was that conversation
that took me on a journey
all around Africa and
all around the world,
sitting at the feet
of Indigenous leaders
and hearing the
same story of paleo
contact and human potential.
And that was the
beginning of my journey.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
you mentioned it.
And it's important
just for anyone
who's saying, where did
his Baptist in-laws live
at the time?
And you're talking about Ghana.
So we're talking about
a family from Ghana.
So we understand they
had their own Indigenous
roots of spirituality
that you're speaking of.
So just to place everything.
>>WALLIS: That's exactly right.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WALLIS: To clarify
that, so in Ghana,
they had a sort of
dual layer of story.
There was all the
official story that
came when the British
arrived in 1874
and took over the news agencies,
the newspapers, education.
But the local
folklore, you're right,
was the Ghanaian,
Indigenous Ghanaian story.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Thank you, Paul.
Sean, you're Irish Catholic
with interesting background,
as our viewers know.
>>O'LAORIE: Thanks a million.
So I was raised
by my grandparents
for the first six years of
my life, my father's parents.
And my great grandmother was
still alive at that stage.
She had a very difficult name,
and I couldn't pronounce it.
I used to call her Muddy.
And Muddy was like
a Christian mystic.
She was this rotunda.
She was high.
She was an
extraordinary character,
and she was really mystical.
And she had this extraordinary
devotion, particularly,
to mother Mary.
She would talk to Mary
aloud, and I was privy
to these conversations.
So I presume this was normal.
So I was inculcated with this
level of Christian mysticism.
And she had these
stories, and I could never
figure out where she got them,
particularly birth stories
about Jesus.
And I subsequently saw
Irish interpretations
of the Gnostic scriptures done
in the fifth and sixth century
that I never heard about
in eight years in seminary.
And she was telling
me these stories.
I'm wondering,
where in God's name
do these stories come from?
So there's one group
of stories that we're
hearing from the
great grandparents,
and there's another group
we're hearing from the church.
And they never met
together until I started
reading the Gnostic scriptures.
I said, Holy God, Almighty,
Muddy was there 40 years
before me, and she never even
went to grade school, let alone
high school, or seminary.
So that was the
first piece of it.
And at age 6, I'm given
back to my parents.
And my parents are living
with my mother's parents,
my grandfather, whom
I call Daddy Jim.
And he was literally a druid.
He was a great Irish tap
dancer, great musician.
And he was the best storyteller
I've ever heard in my life.
And he filled my head with
all these great stories
about the [GAELIC].
In Gaelic, we call them the
[GAELIC],, the fairy horse.
And he told me stories about
being abducted himself and time
lapses, as a little
boy, seven years old,
missing three days
out of his life.
So I got filled up
with these stories.
So now, I go to the
seminary at age 18.
I spent eight years
in the seminary.
I'm let loose on
Africa at age 26.
I'm going to go
out there, and I'm
going to tell these
people about the God
I learned in the seminary.
And I very, very
quickly realized,
you know, I'm
meeting a people who
are not as religious, but
perhaps much more spiritual.
Because it didn't
have to do with Sunday
worship or not eating
meat on a Friday,
and it didn't have to
do with indulgences.
And there was no mention
of heaven or hell anywhere.
And so I began to
realize that I needed
to become what Carl Jung would
call a Gnostic intermediary,
somebody who is all fair
with two different systems
and can cross fertilize them
to their mutual benefit.
And so my job was, you
tell me your stories,
I'll tell you my stories.
I'll tell you Celtic
stories, and I'll
tell you a Catholic stories.
And you tell me
Kalenjin stories,
and we began to trade stories.
And so, I began to see that
friends that the names that I
had for God or even
the greetings they had,
in the Kalenjin languages,
there were nomadic pastoralists
that I lived with.
They were being forcibly settled
into an agricultural lifestyle
after independence in 1963.
And I went there in 1972.
So most of these people
were like first generation
agriculturalists.
They didn't know much about it.
And so, I'm listening to them
until their names for God,
and there's this
greeting ritual.
We lived in very,
very tiny communities.
You didn't meet people that
often because they're wandering
around with their livestock.
And when they met each other,
there was this entire ritual.
And instead of saying to
somebody, hi, how you doing?
The greeting was, [NON-ENGLISH].
And [NON-ENGLISH] literally
means, do you love yourself?
And the answer is [NON-ENGLISH].
And then the next question
was, [NON-ENGLISH]??
Does your wife love herself?
[NON-ENGLISH] Yes, my
wife loves herself.
[NON-ENGLISH] Do your
children love themselves?
[NON-ENGLISH] And then the
clincher was, [NON-ENGLISH]??
Do your cattle love themselves?
[NON-ENGLISH] My
cattle love themselves.
So these are people
who are totally
aligned with themselves.
And this is what their
God does for them.
They're totally aligned
with their lifestyle.
And the way to greet
somebody is to make sure
that the other person
is in alignment as well.
So it's a totally different
notion of greeting.
>>REGINA: It almost
brings tears to my eyes
to think that loving oneself
is even part of a dialogue.
You won't hear that
happening, well,
in Boulder or
anywhere else, really.
So let me ask then,
when both of you--
now, your work is in
Australia, Paul, right?
And so you have--
I don't know what the
congregation at the time--
because you were
between congregations
which allowed you to start
taking this message forward.
But you're in
Africa at this time.
Did the shame and guilt stick?
>>O'LAORIE: On my part?
>>REGINA: To the people learning
about the Old Testament gods.
>>O'LAORIE: I've
never met any people--
I've never met an African
with poor self-esteem.
>>REGINA: That's
what's driving me.
That's why I wanted
this conversation.
This is huge.
>>O'LAORIE: Unless they
were educated by Europeans.
>>REGINA: Of course.
Paul, what was your
version of that?
Because you had to take
these uncomfortable parts
of the Bible with these cruel
aspects of a god some kind.
>>WALLIS: Well,
that's exactly right.
And I think anyone who
has a faith like mine was,
which was centered on
Jesus, has problems
with the way the God
character appears
to behave in the Old Testament.
For me, the reason for that
is that we are reading stories
in the Old Testament,
some of which
are about other kinds of entity.
They're not God
stories originally.
They're stories of colonization.
They're stories of
violence and brutalisation
by other species who were
here at different times.
When we read those as Gods
stories, you end up with a God
that you have to tiptoe around
for fear of offending him.
You might offend
him by accident.
And then, your
family is punished
to the seventh generation.
He's mercurial, unforgiving.
Well, origin, one of
the church fathers
said, if you read
the Old Testament
stories of the
Elohim that way, you
will have to believe
of God things
you would not believe of the
most savage and unjust of men.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WALLIS: And it's a
little bit like what
happens to the self-esteem of a
child in a home, where there's
a parent who has mental health
problems or substance abuse
issues, addiction issues.
Everyone has to tiptoe around
that potentially dangerous
parent, and their self
esteem goes to nothing.
And I think we've done that
to ourselves by portraying
an almighty God in that way.
We're all in this cosmic
household where we're
living in fear and terror.
But I think, also, the African
experience is so different.
So the British go into
Ghana, and they go in
with that distorted story about
God that is all about taking
away our self-esteem,
turning us into nobodies,
whose only virtue is
to serve the superior.
But there is a local story
that's far more empowering,
and I found this the
pattern all around the world
that the local, the ancestral
story is far more empowering.
If I go to a traditional
healer in Africa,
whether it's West Africa
or Southern Africa,
that traditional healer will
perceive me entering the room
with an invisible support team.
And sometimes, the
shamanic healer
will be a little
agnostic as to who
or what the support
team are, but they'll
be listening for communication
because they believe
each one of us has a
support team that's
there to help us in our progress
through life and in our journey
of health.
You think about the
worldview difference
that creates, that you and I
are so important in the cosmos,
that we would each have a
support team to get us through.
With that world view,
you're never alone.
You've got a universe
of resources.
That's how important you are.
How can you have
lower self esteem
when you're that
important to the universe?
So it's a totally
different start point.
So it really reinforces
what Sean was just
saying why he never
found that low self
esteem and his journeys
through Africa.
When I was in
theological college,
we had some African
students training with us.
They were from Nigeria, and we
were having a conversation one
day about the problem
of youth suicide, which
is the leading cause of death
for under 25-year-old males.
I think that's the case
in the USA and the UK.
And we had to explain
what suicide meant
to our Nigerian friends.
They couldn't get their
heads around the idea someone
would deliberately
kill themselves,
that they would feel that
badly about themselves.
It was a totally
foreign concept.
And so, I think
the world view we
get to, by the distortions
of our God stories,
and the worldview we get to from
the African shamanic stories
are totally different
experiences of life.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Thank you for that.
And Sean, as you said in
a previous conversation,
there isn't even a word
for low self-esteem.
>>O'LAORIE: There's not.
And there's a word in
Swahili called fundi.
Fundi literally means an expert.
And everybody called
himself a fundi.
So you think a fundi would
be like a brain surgeon,
or a scientist, or whatever.
No.
If you're a plumber, you
call yourself a fundi.
If you're a carpenter,
you are a fundi.
I was in a mission at one
stage, a big, big mission.
And away in the bush
called [NON-ENGLISH]..
Huge, huge, big parish.
Some of my out stations were
literally hundreds miles
traveling.
And I had this old Volkswagen
Beetle that I traveled around.
It's all dirt roads.
And when you travel
in these, there's
a plume of red dirt
behind you, modern dirt.
And so, I always got filthy.
So I went at the
mission, and I'm
trying to wash down this car.
And a guy comes by, big,
big, strong guy called Paolo.
And Paolo, I said, talking,
Paolo, what do you do?
I'm a fundi.
I said, what are
you an expert in?
I was washing my car.
I'm an expert on washing cars.
I said, OK.
Have a go.
So I give him the hose.
I'm hosing down the car, and
the inside is filthy as well.
And I go into the
intermission for half an hour.
I come back out.
He's hosing down the
inside of the car
with this big, big
little lick of fire hose.
And in the Volkswagen, the
battery is under the back seat.
So the water is getting
down to the battery.
It's spilling the acid.
The whole backside
fell out of the car.
Two weeks later, he comes back.
Paolo, what are you
doing back here?
I said, you've ruined
my car two weeks ago.
He said, yeah, that
was two weeks ago.
I'm a fundi now.
I'll wash your
car again for you.
>>REGINA: Well, it
would be lovely to have
that kind of self-esteem,
credentialed or not, right?
So one of the things that
strikes me about this is,
now, we've entered into an age--
and that's why Gaia
exists is because we've
entered into an age
where everyone's
questioning everything.
And one of the first things
most of the people that
watch this show and others have
questioned is their religion.
And you two both
had the challenge
of having to speak of these
uncomfortable brutal passages
to congregations at
one time or another.
And I know that it gave you very
conflicted feelings to do so.
So now we look at what's
happened as people
have turned away from religion.
And now, we're
looking at the effects
of a mass type of atheism,
scientific materialism spilling
over into atheism.
That's pretty much
running the show.
We know religion is on the
decline in the Western world.
Not quite as much as
in the US, but way down
in England and many
other countries.
So let's speak about this.
What happens then when
you no longer want
to buy the story of the
angry and brutal gods,
and you no longer choose
to be subservient to this,
regardless of whether you're
Muslim, whether you're Jewish,
or whether you're
Christian, doesn't matter.
It's happening all over.
>>O'LAORIE: So
here's what I see.
When I look at the trajectory
of mainstream religions
across the world, you
start off with some kind
of a charismatic prophet,
a Buddha figure, or a Jesus
figure, or whatever,
who is really--
people are attracted to him.
So you've got a
bunch of followers.
And then, the prophet is either
killed or dies naturally.
And then, the followers
create a community.
And then, the community somehow
has self-appointed oligarchy
comes to the top
of the community.
I know they insist on
some form of orthodoxy.
And then, the orthodoxy
spills into inquisitions
against their own, who don't
believe what they believe,
and then into crusades
against the others.
And then, at some stage,
there's a new prophet comes.
And Paul, you mentioned two
of them very beautifully
in your latest book.
Francis and Dominic
in the 1200s,
looking at the trajectory
of Christianity
that went from the carpenter
of Galilee to the Crusades
in the 11th and 12th centuries.
And so, you get this
cycle happening again.
So I think it's a kind
of a fractal of what
you see happening
with the evolution
from polytheism
through polytheism,
a system in which there are
many, many ways in which you
can relate to that, which
you do not understand.
And polytheistic culture
has to be much more
forgiving of each other.
But when you develop
monotheism, there's
only one way, one orthodoxy,
one truth, one God, and then
you can punish people.
So polytheistic systems have
a much better record at being
allowing others to think
what they need to think.
So you get the trajectory
from monotheism.
The second stage was monolatry.
Monolatry is where
there are many gods.
And you know there
are many gods,
but you are choosing to
follow a particular one.
And it has a great phrase
that repeats again and again
in the Hebrew scriptures--
[NON-ENGLISH].
Who is like you among
the gods, oh, Lord?
So even Moses, if
he ever existed,
was not a monotheist by any
stretch of the imagination.
He was an advocate
of a particular god.
But this god, as far as I'm
concerned, was just a sky
being.
And then, you go
from monotheism,
which only came into Judaism
during the Babylonian captivity
between 597 BC and 539 BC
when they were in Babylon.
And that's when the infant
circumcision, table fellowship,
and the idea of covenant,
the idea of Sabbath, rest,
the idea table fellowship.
They are setting
themselves aside
because the 10 other
tribes have been wiped out
in 721 by the Assyrian Empire.
There's only two tribes left--
Judah and Benjamin,
and they're desperately
needed to hold on
to their identity.
And this is when the
priestly version of the Bible
comes out, the priestly
section of the Bible,
insisting on genealogies,
and history, and counts,
and ritual, and stuff like that.
Now, the older systems,
they're basically
just following
different, I think,
extraterrestrial communities
and thinking they're gods.
Like the cargo cults in the
Polynesian Islands during World
War II, where American
and Japanese airmen
were coming down and
giving gifts to the locals
and using it as bases.
And when the war was
over and they left,
these guys thought
there were gods.
And they started
creating rituals
to seduce them back again.
And they're known
as cargo cults.
In some senses--
>>REGINA: Cargo cults.
>>O'LAORIE: Cargo cults.
>>REGINA: And when
you're saying God,
you have this cute
little accent.
It sounds like guides.
In our communities and the
guides, and you're saying gods.
Yes.
>>O'LAORIE: OK, all right.
What they called gods were just
technologically-advanced sky
beings.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>O'LAORIE: And they
didn't know any better.
And so, they thought
they were gods.
And they started
imitating two things.
You start imitating where
they live and how they behave.
So we get our moral
codes from the gods,
and we get our temples.
So if you build these
temples, they'll come down
and they'll live here again.
So you've got the
temple in Jerusalem.
You've got the sanctuary lamp
in Catholic churches, where
a host is reserved and the
belief system that, after mass,
when the priest consecrate
host and he puts
some back into the
Tabernacle, Jesus
is delivering the Tabernacle.
So it's like you trapped Jesus
into a physical location.
And so, we trapped
him in hosts, and we
trapped him in our
ethical systems,
repeated what we saw them doing.
And they were deadly.
So we imitated the
good, and the bad,
and the ugly in these guys.
>>REGINA: And that gets much
later in the conversation
into the shadow of
ourselves and much
of what is created in the
Old Testament in particular.
Paul.
>>WALLIS: Well, firstly,
everything that Sean just
said he's said so beautifully.
And secondly, I'm
finding that I'm
contacted every
week by people who
are part of this exodus that
you're describing, Regina.
But a lot of people tell me
that through their background
in faith, or religion,
or church life,
they've had amazing positive
transformational experiences.
And they're trying to get
their heads around how
that fits with the negative
control fear-based manipulation
that they've seen very
often in group life
or in institutional life.
All around the world,
we're discovering
what our religious institutions
have been doing and enabling
around the world, and
it's deeply shocking.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WALLIS: And I think
that's a big part
of why people are moving away
from institutional religion.
And I find it really exciting
to be talking with people
who are able to separate
these experiences they've
had from these negative
behaviors in groups
that they've witnessed
and to realize
that the manipulation is
not a representation of God,
the source of the universe.
>>O'LAORIE: Exactly.
>>WALLIS: Or that
fear-based religion
is not really
representative of God,
the source of the universe.
It's a distortion.
And they want to
hold on to what's
been real if they've experienced
an emotional healing,
or a physical healing,
or a rebirth experience
in their life.
And one of the
things that I find
helps me have
those conversations
is to realize that these amazing
transformational experiences do
not belong to any
particular religious
or spiritual tradition.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WALLIS: They are part
of the human experience
of the universe.
And so, all the things that
in my youth, I used to think,
well, only Christians
have this, I've discovered
that the human race has this.
I used to think only Christians
could do healing like this
or tap cosmic
information this way.
And I discovered, no,
mystical traditions,
shamanic traditions,
people of no spirituality
have these experiences
all the time.
And making that shift has
been very positive for me
because it's enabled me to
form a relationship of love
and respect with all people and
not have this sub-agenda of,
yes, but I'm really right,
and you're really wrong.
You really need to
join what I'm doing.
Once you've dismantled
that, your relationships
shift and take you
to a point where
you are hungry for the good
and the transformational,
and you're very
willing to walk away
from all those tools of
manipulation and fear-mongering
and control that
have unfortunately
marked institutional religion.
>>REGINA: Very well said, and
that is the ideal condition,
where we retain what was
magical and a type of belief
in something even
beyond ourselves
while letting go of the parts
that have been damaging.
What I'm referring to,
also, are the people
who haven't been able
to do that, which
is a very large percentage
of the population, who simply
are saying, no, I
reject that completely.
Where do both of you feel that
takes us, if you haven't yet
embraced this deeper
spirit inside yourself
and our capability as
magnificent human beings,
for healing and everything else?
If you haven't
taken that next step
and you just have been left
with the rejection of it
into scientific materialism,
consumerism, agnosticism,
atheism, and whatnot,
what does that
do to us, as a
species, if you want
to give us your versions of
a snapshot of us right now.
>>O'LAORIE: It puts us
back to sleep immediately.
Because I believe that the
evolution from monotheism
to monolatry to the two-system
God under Zoroastrianism.
You had an Angra Mainyu and
Ahura Mazda, the god of light
and the god of darkness.
And then Judaism would
collapse that to monotheism.
And in fact, a pharaoh
called Akhenaten
had gotten there about 1,400.
>>REGINA: I was going to ask
you about him in just a minute.
>>O'LAORIE: Yeah, he had created
the first monotheistic system.
But it was proved
to be the priests
were really upset with him.
So all the evidence was
destroyed subsequently.
So there were movements
to monotheism,
but monotheism is
only a way station
on the road to mysticism.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>O'LAORIE: But instead
of going toward mysticism,
we went to sectarian warfare.
And there are now 4,300
different religions
on planet Earth right now.
And so what's happened is this
extraordinary fragmentation,
and it's a
fragmentation occasioned
by institutionalization of the
individual journey to source.
Every single one of us should
be responsible for developing
a personal cosmology.
All the great
teachers tell us that.
Gautama Siddhartha
would say, I am Buddha.
I am awake.
Socrates would say,
the unexamined life
is not worth living.
Jesus would say, if
the householder knew
when the thief was going
to break in and steal,
he wouldn't go to sleep.
So it's all about waking up.
But most of us are
living cosmologies
that have been imprinted on us
on wet cement up to age seven.
And so we behave
in ways that we've
been programmed to
behave, and we're not
thinking for ourselves.
So in any situation,
we find ourselves,
we're going to respond from
an unconsciously acquired
and an unconsciously
accessed personal cosmology.
So I keep telling
my community again,
and again, and again,
your primary duty
is to create a
personal cosmology.
And it should do
four things for you.
It should strength you, but it
should make your heart sing.
It should be able to accommodate
all your own unique experiences
of life, and you have to
keep upgrading it again,
and again, and again,
from day to day.
Because you're a
unique human being.
And so, it's like when you
apply this scientific method
to mysticism.
It's exactly the same thing.
The scientific
method, whether you
are studying geology, or
mathematics, or physics,
or whatever, goes through
the following stages.
You start off by making
observations in your field,
whatever your field
happens to be.
You collect your data.
You begin to see possible
patterns in your data.
That creates a hypothesis to
explain the possible pattern.
Now, you've got to test that.
You got empirically test that.
So you set up an experiment to
test if the hypothesis explains
the putative pattern.
If it does, it has to be
replicated by somebody else
to make sure it wasn't a
statistical aberration.
If the other person says, yeah,
we got the same results, now,
you have a principle
established in the field.
Now, a bunch of principles
create a model of the field.
But inevitably, there
will be new anomalous data
present themselves.
And now, you have to
tweak the old model
to accommodate the new data.
And at some stage, so
many anomalous data points
present themselves.
You can't squeeze
them in, no matter
what you do, to the old model.
You've got to
dismantle the old model
and build a brand new model that
can contain all the old data
and all the new data.
And we did that twice
in the 20th century
with relativity theory in 1905
and quantum mechanics in 1920.
Now, the mystics have been doing
that for thousands of years.
You look at your data.
You collect them.
You see a pattern.
You create a hypothesis.
You test it by looking
at all the mystics.
You know, I'm doing this.
I'm meditating, spending
time in nature, whatever.
Are you getting
the same results?
Yeah, I'm getting
the same results.
You establish a principle,
and a bunch of principles
lead to a metaphysical
or a mystical model.
And then, as new
experiences come in,
you try initially to fit
them into the old model,
and they won't work.
At some stage, you have
to create a new model.
And so people have
to be encouraged
to constantly upgrade
the models of reality
and their knowledge of religion.
But instead of that, there's
the fundamentalist mindset.
Shut them down.
Don't let them think.
Here's the truth.
You're going to go
to hell if you don't
accept my version of truth.
And now, there are 4,300
versions of the truth.
>>REGINA: Oh, boy.
OK.
That's a lot.
So our own personal
cosmology is essential.
Don't try to fit a new
cosmology with an old one.
It's not going to work.
So Paul, I'm going to ask this.
We're going to-- you
can comment on that,
but I want to go ahead and
forward it at this point, too.
And that is, I want to get
back to the monotheism point
because there are different
types of monotheism.
One of them is an angry god
that says obey me or I will
squash you like a bug.
When you're talking about
Akhenaten's time, when
he was introducing
it, you're talking
about a recognition
of the cosmos
and the life-giving
force of the sun.
These are slightly
different ways
of viewing monotheism
and devotion,
if you want to call it that.
So we can get into that
in a bit here if you like.
But what you just said, instead
of keeping people small,
reinforcing these
same dour views
of what these institutions
stand for and what God is,
we're now--
I think a lot of people
that watch these shows are
wondering, are some of the same
entities or tribes of entities
that were here, that
created these stories
of the Old Testament,
still interfering
in our understanding
of ourselves?
And at the very top, top,
top of all of the systems
and institutions today, is
their hands still present,
trying to suppress human
spirit, curiosity, and genius?
>>O'LAORIE: Take it away, Paul.
>>WALLIS: I'd love--
all right, I'm
going to get onto
that question, but I
do want to comment on
what Sean just said,
because I can illustrate that
wonderful picture that Sean
painted at an individual level.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WALLIS: Because,
I think, if you've
come out of a coherent religious
worldview, then that can just
leave you bereft, and
depressed, and living
in a world where you're
overscheduled, distressed.
There's no support.
There's no assistance,
and that might
be balanced by keeping yourself
entertained in the evenings.
And that's how you move
forward, except I find,
if I can ask anybody,
have you ever
experienced something
you couldn't explain,
everyone has a story.
And if I ask something
even more specific,
have you ever experienced like
a flash of a higher cognitive
power?
Well, actually, yes, I had
a flash of remote viewing.
I had a flash of
telepathic connection.
And then, very often
with coaching clients,
I'll say, you
know, I'm beginning
to believe that each one of
us has an invisible support
cloud of helpers.
I've yet to have
someone not say,
I'm coming to
believe that as well.
And that hasn't come from
their religious beliefs.
It's coming from
their experience.
And so, with
questions like that,
I'm asking them to
notice the anomalies that
don't fit their old worldview,
that don't fit their rejected
worldview, and that point to
the need for a new worldview.
And as you join the dots between
your anomalous experiences,
and those of the person
you're speaking to,
and those of your
friends, a new worldview
does form, one in which we
are not alone, one in which
there is a universe of
resources available to you.
And it is such an easy
journey when you do
it piece by piece in that way.
These experiences
really chip away
at the foundations of the
old damaging mindset that's
been so enslaving.
So I feel very
optimistic about people
finding that new world view in
the way Sean was describing.
>>REGINA: Yes, I think there
is reason for optimism.
And yet, I look around
at mainstream everything
pretty much, which is about
as cynical as it gets,
which ridicules a
person for daring, even
open up to their own
experience, discredits one's
own experience.
And I think, still,
what bothers me
is the vast majority
of the population are
living under those influences.
>>WALLIS: Yes, that's very true.
And I think we have to
give each other permission
to share those experiences.
So some of us have
to step out and be
willing to be embarrassed or
be willing to be ridiculed.
Because if I share
my ridiculous story,
it gives freedom to
someone else to share
their ridiculous story.
And it's a grassroots
thing we have
to do to push this
conversation forward, I think.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, so now back to the other--
and thank you for that.
That was a wonderful follow-on.
So back to the question I
asked you, which gets into--
we talked about
this off-camera--
some of these Pat
themes that we've
had going on, even
at Gaia, calling us
a slave species, et cetera.
So both of you,
do you think there
has been some
intentional governing
factor to limit the
expression of humanity
into these finer realms of our
native, being an intelligence?
A, has there been a limitation?
And B, do we still have
active participants doing this
at this time, in your opinions?
>>WALLIS: I'd say yes.
Yes, in ancestral memory,
and yes, through history.
So if we look at the
story of human origins,
for instance, that comes from
the Mayan tradition, expressed
in the Popol Vuh, the story
is told with amazing frankness
that there were visitors
at one point who
wanted a working class.
And they engineered Homo
sapiens, the phrase was,
to do the work for us
and bring us our food.
And so they have a long
series of experiments.
And this is way back into
our animal prehistory.
The experiments result in
ape-like creatures who live
in the forest, it says, and us.
But it actually
resulted in beings
who were far more
than they'd intended,
far more intelligent, far more
conscious, far more beautiful.
It was us plus more
telepathic connection,
better remote viewing,
better precognition,
better self-healing.
And so the engineers in
the Popol Vuh stories,
think, hang on, we don't
need them this clever.
Can we dial them
down a bit, so we
can manage all we want as a
workforce, for goodness' sake.
And so they have an
emergency meeting.
And they work out, the way
to dial the humans down
is to spray a vapor
over human populations
that will damage our
neurological health
and shut off these
higher capacities.
Limit our vision is the phrase.
And just to unpack
that, if you think
about how is our vision limited,
well, it's limited by surfaces.
We can't see behind things.
We can't see into things.
It's limited by time.
We can only see the present.
We can't see the past.
We can't see the future.
It's limited by distance.
We can't see beyond the horizon.
We can't see into deep space.
It's limited by frequency.
We can only see this
spectrum of radio waves.
Whereas, a dog can see this.
A cat can see this.
Take all those limits
off, all of a sudden,
you've got X-ray vision,
remote viewing, future viewing.
How do you manage and manipulate
being that intelligent?
And so, this was the story.
They sprayed a vapor.
But there's a positive
take home from the story,
and that is that
they didn't downgrade
what we are within ourselves.
They put something into the
environment to dial us down.
And the punchline of that story
is that absent of that vapor,
absent of those toxins
in the environment,
you and I start becoming
healthier, more intelligent,
more conscious.
That's our natural state.
Now, the culture that
curated that story about us
was the Mayan culture.
When the Spanish
and the Portuguese
went into central
and South America,
those were the stories
they shut down,
along with the shamanic
and mystical protocols that
existed in those cultures for
activating our higher powers.
They wanted to delete the
information and the knowledge
of how to be more conscious
and more intelligent
and replace it with
Christian orthodoxy, which
they, the conquerors,
would provide
through their churches,
their education system,
so on, and so forth.
And they created a
worldview for those living
in Central and
South America, where
you've got God at the
top of the pyramid,
along with the Kings of
Portugal and Spain and the Pope.
And then you've got the army
and the Catholic priests
in the middle, and then
the people at the bottom,
praying and obeying.
And so they've deleted this
worldview, where we all
have inter-dimensional support
and assistance, where we all
have higher cognitive
powers, and they've
replaced it with this
feudalizing structure.
And in almost every
story of colonization,
you can see that delete and
replace action going on.
And I think, in a
way, it still goes on.
>>REGINA: Yes,
thank you for that.
And you just said it,
this interdimensionality,
they were looking at one-- the
story of the vapor is looking
at one dimension of what it
is to be human rather than
our multidimensional nature and
ability to access those higher
realms of consciousness,
which were not--
I guess, they, themselves,
were not skilled at that
and thus didn't understand the
nature of multidimensionality
themselves.
>>O'LAORIE: So when I trace it,
even through the Bible itself
and into history subsequently,
I'm fascinated by it.
Firstly, I don't believe
that the God in the Bible
is the God.
I put the God on trial.
I just read a whole book where
I put God on trial against--
>>REGINA: I love it.
I love your book.
>>O'LAORIE: --crimes
against humanity.
But one of the
things I'm seeing is
that these sky beings
of various kinds,
that when they
came here, there's
this great story of
Babel, the Tower of Babel,
where they said, let us
confuse their tongues.
Now what I hear on this
wasn't that everybody spoke
a single tongue before Babel
and that they confused us,
so they're now speaking
different languages.
My belief system is precisely
what you were saying,
Paul, is that people had
telepathic, clairvoyant,
clear scent, clear
audio capabilities.
And what they did was,
they taught them language.
So it's not that they
confused the language
by telling them reducing
all the languages to one,
but that there were telepathic
exchanges, clairvoyance,
precognition, cytokinesis.
All these powers were
resident in the creation.
And they shut them all off.
And now, they're
going to have to focus
on the verbalization of ideas.
And as soon as you try to
put thoughts into word,
words are very,
very leaky vessels.
If you look at any piece of
artwork, even for 10 seconds,
and you try to
describe it, it's going
to take you a million words
to describe what you've
just witnessed and taken it.
And so, words can't
do justice to it.
So you reduce it
down to one language.
Now, over time, it's spread
into many, many languages.
Now, historically, I think
what we've done with that
and we realized that
every language creates
a mindset, which
creates a culture,
and it articulates
in story form.
And stories become the
archived wisdom of the culture.
Now, when the colonials
move in, what do they do?
The first thing is they try
to destroy the language.
By the beginning of
the 20th century,
there were 7,000
languages on planet Earth.
By the end of that
century, there
were 5,000 languages left.
So there were 7,000
different mindsets trying
to grasp the human experience.
Now, if you shut down a
language, what you're doing is
you're shutting
down the stories.
You shut down the
stories, you're
shutting down the culture.
You shut down the culture,
you're selling the cosmology.
And so you've left people
without a cosmology.
I know you come in, you
say, here's the language.
Here's the culture, and
here's the cosmology.
And it has to do
with our technology,
and there's a stratification, as
Paul mentioned so beautifully,
a hierarchical system,
a secular version of it,
and a religious version of it.
And now, you've got the peons
at the bottom with no stories
to tell, no cosmology,
no culture, no language,
except that of the colonialist.
And now, we're powerless.
And that's been actively--
throughout human history, it's
been actively, including our
own, time's being promoted.
>>REGINA: Now, this is what
I mentioned a moment ago,
that some of the other
offers, my friend, Michael
Hollinger and others
refer to, as reducing us
to a slave species.
Now when I even
say those words--
and we're just going to
wrap it up on this question.
We're almost out of time.
How do both of you
feel about the notion
that humans have been
reduced to a slave species?
>>O'LAORIE: I start
and Paul finish.
So I'll tell you a story from
my own tradition in Ireland.
There's a tradition in
Ireland, particularly up
into the 1940s and 1950s.
I was born in 1946.
And all fires were trough fires,
what you might call pit fires--
pit.
>>REGINA: Pit, yes, pit.
Yes.
>>O'LAORIE: We call
the trough in Ireland.
So all fires were trough fires.
At night, when the
family went to bed,
the mother would be the
last person to go to bed.
And she would take
the fire, wreck it,
put all the embers together.
And she'd put the dust
over the top of it,
so the embers would stay
alive during the night.
She would go to bed.
She'd be the first
one up in the morning.
She'd take the embers
aside, blow on them,
and put new trough
in it, and the fire
would start right back up.
Now, that is what mysticism
has had to do in our world.
It's like there's been the
suppression of the embers
of the Holy Spirit.
And somehow, the
mystics of the world
have always managed
to go underground.
And Paul did a beautiful piece
in his last book on the Cathars
in 13th century Europe--
little groups who
kept the embers alive.
And that's what the mystics have
done throughout human history.
They're the mothers who put
the clinker and the fine ash
on the embers at night, when
the soldiers are passing by,
to take it away in the
morning, blow upon it,
and rekindle the fire.
And there were houses in Ireland
in which the fire literally
didn't go out for 300 years.
>>REGINA: I've read that in
other books as well as yours.
That's a beautiful
metaphor for it.
We're going to toss
it to you now, Paul,
to make your final comments.
>>WALLIS: I think the story I've
just told from the Popol Vuh
illustrates it beautifully.
I think there was a
slavery experience.
That was part of our story.
I think we have
experienced colonization
in that way in the past.
But even within the
Popol Vuh, that's
not the explanation
of who we are.
They created something far
more able and beautiful
when they created us.
And when we start
reading ancestral stories
in the original languages,
as Sean was just describing,
suddenly, we discover
that some of our neighbors
come because they want
to be more like us.
They want what we have
in their gene pool.
I think there's something unique
about our heritage, our animal
heritage, our mammal
heritage, whatever
ET advantage we got
in that Mayan story
to create a species with a
unique capacity for love,
compassion,
creativity that makes
us attractive to our neighbors.
That meant that the
stories of first contact
all around the world
are of beings coming
to assist us and
support us, and that's
what we talked about earlier
with that shamanic view
of healing.
That's who we are.
That's how valuable we are.
We are far more than
slaves, even if it
was a moment in our deep past.
>>REGINA: Hear.
Hear.
Thank you both for that
absolutely beautiful end
to this part of the discussion.
Because we're going
to do something
we normally do not do at Gaia.
We're going to have a
two-part conversation.
In part two of our
conversation, we'll
look at how the Indigenous
people of the world
view the gods.
Stay tuned for that.
There is a spoiler alert.
It appears to be a completely
different set of gods.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."